.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

============
Architecture
============

Introduction
============

SGX is a set of instructions and mechanisms that enable ring 3 applications to
set aside private regions of code and data for the purpose of establishing and
running enclaves.  An enclave is a secure entity whose private memory can only
be accessed by code running within the enclave.  Accesses from outside the
enclave, including software running at a higher privilege level and other
enclaves, are disallowed by hardware.

SGX also provides for local and remote attestation.  `Attestation`_ allows an
enclave to attest its identity, that it has not been tampered with, that it is
running on a genuine platform with Intel SGX enabled, and the security
properties of the platform on which it is running.

You can determine if your CPU supports SGX by querying ``/proc/cpuinfo``:

	``cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep sgx``


Enclave Page Cache
==================

SGX utilizes an Enclave Page Cache (EPC) to store pages that are associated
with an enclave.  The EPC is secure storage whose exact physical implementation
is micro-architecture specific (see `EPC Implemenations`_).  Similar to normal
system memory, the EPC is managed by privileged software using conventional
paging mechanisms, e.g. the kernel can grant/deny access to EPC memory by
manipulating a process' page tables, and can swap pages in/out of the EPC in
order to oversubscribe the EPC.

Unlikely regular memory, hardware prevents arbitrary insertion, eviction,
deletion, access, etc... to/from the EPC.  Software must instead use dedicated
`SGX instructions`_ to operate on the EPC, which enables the processor to
provide SGX's security guarantees by enforcing various restrictions and
behaviors, e.g. limits concurrent accesses to EPC pages and ensures proper TLB
flushing when moving pages in/out of the EPC.

Accesses to EPC pages are allowed if and only if the access is classified as an
"enclave access".  There are two categories of allowed enclave accesses: direct
and indirect.  Direct enclave accesses are generated if and only the processor
is executing in Enclave Mode (see `Enclave execution`_).  Indirect enclave
accesses are generated by various ENCL{S,U,V} functions, many of which can be
executed outside of Enclave Mode.

Non-enclave accesses to the EPC result in undefined behavior.  Conversely,
enclave accesses to non-EPC memory result in a page fault (#PF)[1]_.  Page
faults due to invalid enclave accesses set the PF_SGX flag (bit 15) in the page
fault error code[2]_.

Although all EPC implementations will undoubtedly encrypt the EPC itself, all
all EPC code/data is stored unencrypted in the processor's caches.  I.e. SGX
relies on the aforementioned mechanisms to protect an enclave's secrets while
they are resident in the cache.

Note, EPC pages are always 4KB sized and aligned.  Software can map EPC using
using large pages, but the processor always operates on a 4KB granularity when
working with EPC pages.


SGX instructions
================

SGX introduces three new instructions, ENCLS, ENCLU and ENCLV, for Supervisor,
User and Virtualization respectively.  ENCL{S,U,V} are umbrella instructions,
using a single opcode as the front end to a variety of SGX functions.  The leaf
function to execute is specified via %eax, with %rbx, %rcx and %rdx optionally
used for leaf-specific purposes.

Note that supervisor software, i.e. the kernel, creates and manages enclaves,
but only user-level software can execute/enter an enclave.

ENCLS Leafs
-----------

 - ECREATE: create an enclave
 - EADD: add page to an uninitialized enclave
 - EAUG: add page to an initialized enclave
 - EEXTEND: extended the measurement of an (uninitialized) enclave
 - EINIT: verify and initialize enclave
 - EDBG{RD,WR}: read/write from/to a debug enclave’s memory
 - EMODPR: restrict an EPC page’s permissions
 - EMODT: modify an EPC page’s type
 - EBLOCK: mark a page as blocked in EPCM
 - ETRACK{C}: activate blocking tracing
 - EWB: write back page from EPC to regular memory
 - ELD{B,U}{C}: load page in {un}blocked state from system memory to EPC
 - EPA: add version array (use to track evicted EPC pages)
 - EREMOVE: remove a page from EPC
 - ERDINFO: retrieve info about an EPC page from EPCM

ENCLU Leafs
-----------
 - EENTER: enter an enclave
 - ERESUME: resume execution of an interrupted enclave
 - EEXIT: exit an enclave
 - EGETKEY: retrieve a cryptographic key from the processor
 - EREPORT: generate a cryptographic report describing an enclave
 - EMODPE: extend an EPC page's permissions
 - EACCEPT: accept changes to an EPC page
 - EACCEPTCOPY: copy an existing EPC page to an uninitialized EPC page

ENCLV Leafs
-----------
 - E{DEC,INC}VIRTCHILD: {dec,inc}rement SECS virtual refcount
 - ESETCONTEXT: set SECS’ context pointer


EPC page types
==============

All pages in the EPC have an explicit page type identifying the type of page.
The type of page affects the page's accessibility, concurrency requirements,
lifecycle, etc...

SGX Enclave Control Structure (SECS)
    An enclave is defined and referenced by an SGX Enclave Control Structure.
    When creating an enclave (via ECREATE), software provides a source SECS for
    the enclave, which is copied into a target EPC page.  The source SECS
    contains security and measurement information, as well as attributes and
    properties of the enclave.  Once the SECS is copied into the EPC, it's used
    by the processor to store enclave metadata, e.g. the number of EPC pages
    associated with the enclave, and is no longer directly accessible by
    software.

Regular (REG)
    Regular EPC pages contain the code and data of an enclave.  Code and data
    pages can be added to an uninitialized enclave (prior to EINIT) via EADD.
    Post EINIT, pages can be added to an enclave via EAUG.  Pages added via
    EAUG must be explicitly accepted by the enclave via EACCEPT or EACCEPTCOPY.

Thread Control Structure (TCS)
    Thread Control Structure pages define the entry points to an enclave and
    track the execution state of an enclave thread.  A TCS can only be used by
    a single logical CPU at any given time, but otherwise has no attachment to
    any particular logical CPU.  Like regular pages, TCS pages are added to
    enclaves via EADD and EINIT.

Version Array (VA)
   Version Array pages contain 512 slots, each of which can contain a version
   number for a page evicted from the EPC.  A version number is a unique 8-byte
   value that is fed into the MAC computation used to verify the contents of an
   evicted page when reloading said page into the EPC.  VA pages are the only
   page type not directly associated with an enclave, and are allocated in the
   EPC via EPA.   Note that VA pages can also be evicted from the EPC, but
   doing so requires another VA page/slot to hold the version number of the VA
   page being evicted.

Trim (TRIM)
   The Trim page type indicates that a page has been trimmed from the enclave’s
   address space and is no longer accessible to enclave software, i.e. is about
   to be removed from the enclave (via EREMOVE).  Removing pages from a running
   enclaves requires the enclave to explicit accept the removal (via EACCEPT).
   The intermediate Trim type allows software to batch deallocation operations
   to improve efficiency, e.g. minimize transitions between userspace, enclave
   and kernel.


Enclave Page Cache Map
======================

The processor tracks EPC pages via the Enclave Page Cache Map (EPCM).  The EPCM
is a processor-managed structure that enforces access restrictions to EPC pages
in addition to the software-managed page tables.  The EPCM contains one entry
per EPC page, and although the details are implementation specific, all
implementations contain the following architectural information:

 - The status of EPC page with respect to validity and accessibility.
 - An SECS identifier of the enclave to which the page belongs.
 - The type of page: regular, SECS, TCS, VA or TRIM
 - The linear address through which the enclave is allowed to access the page.
 - The specified read/write/execute permissions on that page.

Access violations, e.g. insufficient permissions or incorrect linear address,
detected via the EPCM result in a page fault (#PF)[1]_ exception being signaled
by the processor.  Page faults due to EPCM violations set the PF_SGX flag
(bit 15) in the page fault error code[2]_.

The EPCM is consulted if and only if walking the software-managed page tables,
i.e. the kernel's page tables, succeeds.  I.e. the effective permissions for an
EPC page are a logical AND of the kernel's page tables and the corresponding
EPCM entry.  This allows the kernel to make its page tables more restrictive
without triggering an EPCM violation, e.g. it may mark an entry as not-present
prior to evicting a page from the EPC.

**IMPORTANT** For all intents and purposes the SGX architecture allows the
processor to invalidate all EPCM entries at will, i.e. requires that software
be prepared to handle an EPCM fault at any time.  Most processors are expected
to implement the EPC{M} as a subset of system DRAM that is encrypted with an
ephemeral key, i.e. a key that is randomly generated at processor reset.  As a
result of using an ephemeral key, the contents of the EPC{M} are lost when the
processor is powered down as part of an S3 transition or when a virtual machine
is live migrated to a new physical system.


Enclave initialization
======================

Because software cannot directly access the EPC except when executing in an
enclave, an enclave must be built using ENCLS functions (ECREATE and EADD) as
opposed to simply copying the enclave from the filesystem to memory.  Once an
enclave is built, it must be initialized (via EINIT) before userspace can enter
the enclave and begin `Enclave execution`_.

During the enclave build process, two "measurements", i.e. SHA-256 hashes, are
taken of the enclave: MRENCLAVE and MRSIGNER.  MRENCLAVE measures the enclave's
contents,  e.g. code/data explicitly added to the measurement (via EEXTEND), as
well as metadata from the enclave's build process, e.g. pages offsets (relative
to the enclave's base) and page permissions of all pages added to the enclave
(via EADD).  MRENCLAVE is initialized by ECREATE and finalized by EINIT.
MRSIGNER is simply the SHA-256 hash of the public key used to sign the enclave.

EINIT accepts two parameters in addition to the SECS of the target enclave: an
Enclave Signature Struct (SIGSTRUCT) and an EINIT token (EINITTOKEN).
SIGSTRUCT is a structure created and signed by the enclave's developer.  Among
other fields, SIGSTRUCT contains the expected MRENCLAVE of the enclave and the
MRSIGNER of the enclave.  SIGSTRUCT's MRENCLAVE is used by the processor to
verify that the enclave was properly built (at runtime), and its SIGSTRUCT is
copied to the SECS upon successful EINIT.  EINITTOKEN is an optional parameter
that is consumed as part of `Launch Control`_.


Enclave execution
=================

Enclaves execute in a bespoke sub-mode of ring 3, appropriately named Enclave
Mode.  Enclave Mode changes behavior in key ways to support SGX's security
guarantees and to reduce the probability of unintentional disclosure of
sensitive data.

A notable cornerstone of Enclave Mode is the Enclave Linear Range (ELRANGE).
An enclave is associated with one, and only one, contiguous linear address
range, its ELRANGE.  The ELRANGE is specified via the SIZE and BASEADDR fields
in the SECS (provided to ECREATE).  The processor queries the active enclave's
ELRANGE to differentiate enclave and non-enclave accesses, i.e. accesses that
originate in Enclave Mode *and* whose linear address falls within ELRANGE are
considered (direct) enclave accesses.  Note, the processor also generates
(indirect) enclave accesses when executing ENCL* instructions, which may occur
outside of Enclave Mode, e.g. when copying the SECS to its target EPC page
during ECREATE.

Enclave Mode changes include, but are not limited to:

 - Permits direct software access to EPC pages owned by the enclave
 - Ensures enclave accesses map to the EPC (EPCM violation, i.e. #PF w/ PF_SGX)
 - Prevents executing code outside the enclave's ELRANGE (#GP fault)
 - Changes the behavior of exceptions/events
 - Causes many instructions to become illegal, i.e. generate an exception
 - Supresses all instruction breakpoints*
 - Suppresses data breakpoints within enclave's ELRANGE*

 * For non-debug enclaves.

Transitions to/from Enclave Mode have semantics that are a lovely blend of
SYSCALL, SYSRET and VM-Exit.  In normal execution, entering and exiting Enclave
Mode can only be done through EENTER and EEXIT respectively.  EENTER+EEXIT is
analogous to SYSCALL+SYSRET, e.g. EENTER/SYSCALL load RCX with the next RIP and
EEXIT/SYSRET load RIP from R{B,C}X, and EENTER can only jump to a predefined
location controlled by the enclave/kernel.

But when an exception, interrupt, VM-Exit, etc... occurs, enclave transitions
behave more like VM-Exit and VMRESUME.  To maintain the black box nature of the
enclave, the processor automatically switches register context when any of the
aforementioned events occur (the SDM refers to such events as Enclave Exiting
Events (EEE)).

To handle an EEE, the processor performs an Asynchronous Enclave Exits (AEX).
Note, although exceptions and traps are synchronous from a processor execution
perspective, the are asynchronous from the enclave's perspective as the enclave
is not provided an opportunity to save/fuzz state prior to exiting the enclave.
On an AEX, the processor exits the enclave to a predefined %rip called the
Asynchronous Exiting Pointer (AEP).  The AEP is specified at enclave entry (via
EENTER/ERESUME) and saved into the associated TCS, similar to how a hypervisor
specifies the VM-Exit target (via VMCS.HOST_RIP at VMLAUNCH/VMRESUME), i.e. the
the AEP is an exit location controlled by the enclave's untrusted runtime.

On an AEX, the processor fully exits the enclave prior to vectoring the event,
i.e. from the event handler's perspective the event occurred at the AEP.  Thus,
IRET/RSM/VMRESUME (from the event handler) returns control to the enclave's
untrusted runtime, which can take appropriate action, e.g. immediately ERESUME
the enclave on interrupts, forward expected exceptions to the enclave, restart
the enclave on fatal exceptions, and so on and so forth.

To preserve the enclave's state across AEX events, the processor automatically
saves architectural into a State Save Area (SSA).  Because SGX supports nested
AEX events, e.g. the untrusted runtime can re-EENTER the enclave after an AEX,
which can in turn trigger an AEX, the TCS holds a pointer to a stack of SSA
frames (as opposed to a single SSA), an index to the current SSA frame and the
total number of available frames.  When an AEX occurs, the processor saves the
architectural state into the TCS's current SSA frame.  The untrusted runtime
can then pop the last SSA frame (off the TCS's stack) via ERESUME, i.e. restart
the enclave after the AEX is handled.


Launch Control
==============

SGX provides a set of controls, referred to as Launch Control, that governs the
initialization of enclaves.  The processor internally stores a SHA-256 hash of
a 3072-bit RSA public key, i.e. a MRSIGNER, often referred to as the "LE pubkey
hash".  The LE pubkey hash is used during EINIT to prevent launching an enclave
without proper authorization.  In order for EINIT to succeed, the enclave's
MRSIGNER (from SIGSTRUCT) *or* the MRSIGNER of the enclave's EINITTOKEN must
match the LE pubkey hash.

An EINITTOKEN can only be created by a so called Launch Enclave (LE).  A LE is
an enclave with SECS.ATTRIBUTES.EINITTOKEN_KEY=1, which grants it access to the
EINITTOKEN_KEY (retrieved via EGETKEY).  EINITTOKENs provide a ready-built
mechanism for userspace to bless enclaves without requiring additional kernel
infrastructure.

Processors that support SGX Launch Control Configuration, enumerated by the
SGX_LC flag (bit 30 in CPUID 0x7.0x0.ECX), expose the LE pubkey hash as a set
of four MSRs, aptly named IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH[0-3].  The reset value of the
MSRs is an internally defined (Intel) key (processors that don't support
SGX_LC also use an internally defined key, it's just not exposed to software).

While the IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH MSRs are readable on any platform that supports
SGX_LC, the MSRs are only writable if the IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL is locked with
bit 17 ("SGX Launch Control Enable" per the SDM, or more accurately "SGX LE
pubkey hash writable") set to '1'.  Note, the MSRs are also writable prior to
`SGX activation`_.

Note, while "Launch Control Configuration" is the official feature name used by
the Intel SDM, other documentation may use the term "Flexible Launch Control",
or even simply "Launch Control".  Colloquially, the vast majority of usage of
the term "Launch Control" is synonymous with "Launch Control Configuration".


EPC oversubscription
====================

SGX supports the concept of EPC oversubscription.  Analogous to swapping system
DRAM to disk, enclave pages can be swapped from the EPC to memory, and later
reloaded from memory to the EPC.  But because the kernel is untrusted, swapping
pages in/out of the EPC has specialized requirements:

  - The kernel cannot directly access EPC memory, i.e. cannot copy data to/from
    the EPC.
  - The kernel must "prove" to hardware that there are no valid TLB entries for
    said page prior to eviction (a stale TLB entry would allow an attacker to
    bypass SGX access controls).
  - When loading a page back into the EPC, hardware must be able to verify
    the integrity and freshness of the data.
  - When loading an enclave page, e.g. regular and TCS pages, hardware must be
    able to associate the page with an SECS, i.e. refcount an enclaves pages.

To satisfy the above requirements, the CPU provides dedicated ENCLS functions
to support paging data in/out of the EPC:

  - EBLOCK: Mark a page as blocked in the EPC Map (EPCM).  Attempting to access
    a blocked page that misses the TLB will fault.
  - ETRACK: Activate TLB tracking.  Hardware verifies that all translations for
    pages marked as "blocked" have been flushed from the TLB.
  - EPA:    Add Version Array page to the EPC (see `EPC page types`_)
  - EWB:    Write back a page from EPC to memory, e.g. RAM.  Software must
    supply a VA slot, memory to hold the Paging Crypto Metadata (PCMD) of the
    page and obviously backing for the evicted page.
  - ELD*:   Load a page in {un}blocked state from memory to EPC.

Swapped EPC pages are {de,en}crypted on their way in/out of the EPC, e.g. EWB
encrypts and ELDU decrypts.  The version number (stored in a VA page) and PCMD
structure associated with an evicted EPC page seal a page (prevent undetected
modification) and ensure its freshness (prevent rollback to a stale version of
the page) while the page resides in unprotected storage, e.g. memory or disk.


Attestation
===========

SGX provides mechanisms that allow software to implement what Intel refers to
as Local Attestation (used by enclaves running on a the same physical platform
to securely identify one another) and Remote Attestation (a process by which an
enclave attests itself to a remote entity in order to gain the trust of said
entity).

The details of Local Attestation and Remote Attestation are far beyond the
scope of this document.  Please see Intel's Software Developer's Manual and/or
use your search engine of choice to learn more about SGX's attestation
capabilities.


EPC Implemenations
==================

PRM with MEE
--------------

Initial hardware support for SGX implements the EPC by reserving a chunk of
system DRAM, referred to as Processor Reserved Memory (PRM).   A percentage of
PRM is consumed by the processor to implement the EPCM, with the remainder of
PRM being exposed to software as the EPC.  PRM is configured by firmware via
dedicated PRM Range Registers (PRMRRs).   The PRMRRs are locked  which are locked as part of SGX activation, i.e.
resizing the PRM, and thus EPC, requires rebooting the system.

An autonomous hardware unit called the Memory Encryption Engine (MEE) protects
the confidentiality, integrity, and freshness of the PRM, e.g. {de,en}crypts
data as it is read/written from/to DRAM to provide confidentiality.


SGX activation
==============

Before SGX can be fully enabled, e.g. via FEATURE_CONTROL, the platform must
undergo explicit SGX activation.  SGX activation is a mechanism by which the
processor verifies and locks the platform configuration set by pre-boot
firmware, e.g. to ensure it satisfies SGX's security requirements.  Before
SGX is activated (and its configuration locked), firmware can modify the
PRMRRs, e.g. to set the base/size of the PRM and thus EPC, and can also write
the SGX_LEPUBKEYHASH MSRs.  Notably, the latter allows pre-boot firmware to
lock the SGX_LEPUBKEYHASH MSRs to a non-Intel value by writing the MSRs and
locking MSR_IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL without setting the "SGX LE pubkey hash
writable" flag, i.e. making the SGX_LEPUBKEYHASH MSRs readonly.


Footnotes
=========

.. [1] All processors that do not support the SGX2 ISA take an errata and
       signal #GP(0) instead of #PF(PF_SGX) when vectoring EPCM violations and
       faults due to enclave-accesses to non-EPC memory.

.. [2] Note that despite being vectored as a #PF, a #PF with PF_SGX has nothing
       to do with conventional paging.

